                                                                                             REVIEW ARTICLE




                                      Open-­source tools for behavioral
                                      video analysis: Setup, methods, and
                                      best practices
                                      Kevin Luxem1†, Jennifer J Sun2†, Sean P Bradley3, Keerthi Krishnan4, Eric Yttri5,
                                      Jan Zimmermann6, Talmo D Pereira7*, Mark Laubach8*
                                      1
                                       Cellular Neuroscience, Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany;
                                      2
                                       Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of
                                      Technology, Pasadena, United States; 3Rodent Behavioral Core, National Institute of
                                      Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, United States; 4Department
                                      of Biochemistry and Cellular & Molecular Biology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville,
                                      United States; 5Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University,
                                      Pittsburgh, United States; 6Department of Neuroscience, University of Minnesota,
                                      Minneapolis, United States; 7The Salk Institute of Biological Studies, La Jolla, United
                                      States; 8Department of Neuroscience, American University, Washington D.C., United
                                      States



                                      Abstract Recently developed methods for video analysis, especially models for pose estimation
                                      and behavior classification, are transforming behavioral quantification to be more precise, scalable,
                                      and reproducible in fields such as neuroscience and ethology. These tools overcome long-­standing
                                      limitations of manual scoring of video frames and traditional ‘center of mass’ tracking algorithms to
*For correspondence:                  enable video analysis at scale. The expansion of open-­source tools for video acquisition and analysis
talmo@princeton.edu (TDP);            has led to new experimental approaches to understand behavior. Here, we review currently avail-
mark.laubach@gmail.com (ML)           able open-­source tools for video analysis and discuss how to set up these methods for labs new to
†
 These authors contributed
                                      video recording. We also discuss best practices for developing and using video analysis methods,
equally to this work                  including community-­wide standards and critical needs for the open sharing of datasets and code,
                                      more widespread comparisons of video analysis methods, and better documentation for these
Competing interest: The authors       methods especially for new users. We encourage broader adoption and continued development of
declare that no competing
                                      these tools, which have tremendous potential for accelerating scientific progress in understanding
interests exist.
                                      the brain and behavior.
Funding: See page 16
Received: 07 April 2022
Accepted: 03 March 2023
Published: 23 March 2023              Quantitative tools for video analysis
                                      Traditional approaches to analyzing video data have involved researchers watching video playback
Reviewing Editor: Denise J Cai,
                                      and noting the times and locations of specific events of interest. These analyses are very time-­
Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, United States            consuming, require expert knowledge in the target species and experimental design, and are prone
                                      to user bias (Anderson and Perona, 2014). Video recordings are often made for many different
‍ ‍Copyright Luxem, Sun et al.
                                      animals and behavioral test sessions, but only reviewed for a subset of experiments. Complete sets
This article is distributed under
                                      of videos are rarely made accessible in published studies and the analysis methods are often vaguely
the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License,
                                      described. There are variations in scoring criteria across researchers and labs, even over time by a
which permits unrestricted use        single researcher. Collectively, these issues present major challenges for research reproducibility and
and redistribution provided that      the difficulty and cost of manual video analysis has led to the dominance of easy-­to-­use measures
the original author and source        (lever pressing, beam breaks) in the neuroscience literature, and this has limited our understanding of
are credited.                         brain-­behavior relationships (Krakauer et al., 2017).


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                               1 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                   Neuroscience

                                          For example, ‘reward seeking’ has been a popular topic in recent years and is typically measured
                                      using beam breaks between response and reward ports located inside an operant arena (e.g., Cowen
                                      et al., 2012; Feierstein et al., 2006; Lardeux et al., 2009; van Duuren et al., 2009). By relying only
                                      on the discrete times when animals make a choice and receive a reward, it is not possible to describe
                                      how the animal moves during a choice or how it collects a reward. Animals may not move in the same
                                      way to a reward port when they expect a larger or smaller reward (e.g., Davidson et al., 1980). This
                                      could lead to, for example, a neural recording study labeling a cell as ‘reward encoding’ when it actu-
                                      ally reflects differences in movement.
                                          Commercial products (e.g., Ethovision by Noldus, Any-­Maze by Stoelting) and open-­source proj-
                                      ects (e.g., JAABA: Kabra et al., 2013; SCORHE: Salem et al., 2015; OptiMouse: Ben-­Shaul, 2017;
                                      ezTrack: Pennington et al., 2019) are available for semi-­automated annotation and tracking of behav-
                                      iors. These methods track animals based on differences between the animals and the background
                                      color or luminance. This can be challenging to do in naturalistic settings or for species or strains that
                                      do not have a uniform color (e.g., Long-­Evans rats). These methods provide estimates of the overall
                                      position of an animal in its environment and can be used to measure the direction and velocity of its
                                      movements. These ‘center of mass’ tracking methods could be used to measure where an animal is
                                      and how fast it is moving. More sophisticated versions of these products may also detect the head and
                                      tail of common laboratory species such as rodents or zebrafish and draw inferences from the shape
                                      and location of the animal to classify a small subset of an animal’s behavioral repertoire. However,
                                      these simpler tracking methods cannot account for movements of discrete sets of body parts (e.g.,
                                      head scanning in rodents, which is associated with a classic measure of reward-­guided decisions called
                                      ‘vicarious trial-­and-­error’ behavior: see Redish, 2016, for review).
                                          More advanced analyses could be used to quantify movements across many pixels simultaneously
                                      in video recordings. For example, Stringer et al., 2019, used dimensionality reduction methods
                                      to study the spontaneous coding of visual- and movement-­related information in the mouse visual
                                      cortex in relation to facial movements. Musall et al., 2019, used video recordings of motion data
                                      from several parts of the face of mice as they performed a decision-­making task and related the
                                      measures from the video recordings to cortical imaging data. While these analyses would go beyond
                                      what is possible to achieve with a simple tracking method, the multivariate methods developed by
                                      Stringer and Musall are not themselves capable of categorizing movements, measuring transitions
                                      between different types of movements, or quantifying the dynamics of movement sequences. For
                                      these measures, a different approach is needed.
                                          Methods for capturing the pose of an animal (the location and configuration of its body) have
                                      emerged in recent years (e.g., DeepLabCut: Mathis et al., 2018a; SLEAP: Pereira et al., 2022). These
                                      methods can provide a description of an animal’s movement and posture during a behavioral task.
                                      They can be used to understand the dynamics of naturalistic movements and behaviors, as illustrated
                                      in Figure 1. Pose estimation methods provide information on the position and orientation of multiple
                                      parts of an animal, with recent methods being able to measure pose information for groups of animals
                                      (Chen et al., 2020; Lauer et al., 2021; Pereira et al., 2022; Walter and Couzin, 2021). Some recent
                                      methods now even allow for pose estimation to be run in real experimental time (Kane et al., 2020;
                                      Lopes et al., 2015; Pereira et al., 2022; Schweihoff et al., 2021).
                                          Methods for pose estimation emerged in computer vision research in the late 1970s (Marr et al.,
                                      1978; Nevatia and Binford, 1973). The methods became widely available for the analysis of pose in
                                      human behavior following improvements in computer vision (Behnke, 2003), deep learning (Szegedy
                                      et al., 2013), and computing using graphical processing units (GPUs) (Oh and Jung, 2004). However,
                                      these methods were often not robust or required a lot of training data, which were at the time not
                                      easily available for animal studies. As a result, a number of open-­source tools emerged for pose esti-
                                      mation in animals (e.g., DeepLabCut: Mathis et al., 2018a, LEAP: Pereira et al., 2019; DeepPoseKit:
                                      Graving et al., 2019a). These tools are especially notable in that they were developed to address
                                      specific scientific questions by researchers and are not available from commercial sources. They are an
                                      outstanding example of the ‘open-­source creative process’ (White et al., 2019).
                                          One of these methods, DeepLabCut, has been shown to outperform the commercial software
                                      package EthoVision XT14 and a hardware-­based measurement system from TSE Systems, based on
                                      IR beam breaks (Sturman et al., 2020). When tested across a set of common behavioral assays used
                                      in neuroscience (open field test, elevated plus maze, forced swim test), data from the pose estimation


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                 2 of 20
            Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                             Neuroscience




Figure 1. Setup for video recording. (A) Cameras are mounted above and to the side of a behavioral arena. The cameras record sequences of images
of an animal performing a behavioral task. The recordings are stored on a computer and analyzed with methods for pose estimation and behavior
classification. (B) The animal’s pose trajectory captures the relevant kinematics of the animal’s behavior and is used as input to behavior quantification
algorithms. Quantification can be done using either unsupervised (learning to recognize behavioral states) or supervised (learning to classify behaviors
based on human annotated labels). In this example, transitions among three example behaviors (rearing, walking, and grooming) are depicted on the
lower left and classification of video frames into the three main behaviors are depicted on the lower right.



                                      method was evaluated using a neural network classifier and performed as well as classifications by
                                      human experts, required data from fewer animals to detect differences due to experimental treat-
                                      ments, and in some cases (head dips in an elevated plus maze) detected effects of treatment (a drug)
                                      that was not detected by EthoVision.
                                         In the case of reward seeking behavior, human annotation of videos could resolve the animal’s
                                      position and when and for how long specific behaviors occurred. These measurements could be
                                      made by annotating frames in the video recordings, using tools such as the VIA annotator (Dutta
                                      and Zisserman, 2019), and commercial (e.g., EthoVision) or open-­source (e.g., ezTrack) methods for
                                      whole-­animal tracking. These measurements would not be able to account for coordinated move-
                                      ments of multiple body parts or for the dynamics of transitions between different behaviors that
                                      together comprise reward seeking behavior. These measurements are easily made using methods for
                                      pose estimation. These methods learn to track multiple body parts (for a rodent, the tip of snout, the
                                      ears, the base of the tail) and the positions of these body parts can be compared for different kinds
                                      of trials (small or large reward) using standard statistical models or machine learning methods. These


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                             3 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                   Neuroscience

                                      analyses, together, allow for movements to be categorized (e.g., direct and indirect approach toward
                                      a reward port) and for transitions between different types of movements to be quantified (e.g., from
                                      turning to walking). It would even be possible to detect unique states associated with deliberation
                                      (e.g., head scanning between available choice options). All these measures could then be compared
                                      as a function of an experimental manipulation (drug or lesion) or used to assist in the analysis of
                                      simultaneously collected electrophysiological or imaging data. None of these measures are possible
                                      using conventional methods for annotating video frames or tracking overall the overall position of the
                                      animal in a behavioral arena.
                                          Pose estimation methods have been crucial for several recent publications on topics as diverse
                                      as tracking fluid consumption to understand the neural coding of reward prediction errors (Otten-
                                      heimer et al., 2020), accounting for the effects of wind on the behavior of Drosophila (Okubo et al.,
                                      2020), understanding the contributions of tactile afferents and nociceptors to the perception of touch
                                      in freely moving mice (Schorscher-­Petcu et al., 2021), understanding interactions between tactile
                                      processing by the rodent whisker system and its ability to guide locomotion (Warren et al., 2021),
                                      and measuring the relationship between eye movements and neural activity in freely behaving rodents
                                      (Keshavarzi et al., 2022). While a number of studies are emerging that take advantage of methods
                                      for pose estimation, there is still not enough widespread adoption of the methods across the research
                                      community, perhaps in part due to the technical nature of collecting high-­quality video recordings
                                      as well as setting up and using methods for pose estimation. These methods depend on access to
                                      computing systems with GPUs and the ability to set up and use the required computer software, which
                                      is usually available as computer code written in Python or MATLAB. A researcher who wants to get
                                      started with these approaches will therefore face a number of questions about how to set up video
                                      methods in a laboratory setting. New users may also need to learn some of the jargon associated
                                      with video analysis methods, and some of these terms are defined in Table 1. The primary goals of
                                      this document are twofold: to provide information for researchers interested in setting methods for
                                      video analysis in a research lab and to propose best practices for the use and development of video
                                      analysis methods.



                                      A basic setup for video recordings in animal experiments
                                      In a typical setup for video recording, cameras are placed above, and in some cases to the side or
                                      below, the behavioral arena (Figure 1). The cameras send data to a computer and can be integrated
                                      with inputs from behavioral devices using custom-­written programs using popular libraries such as
                                      OpenCV (Bradski, 2000), open-­source data collection systems such as Bonsai (Lopes et al., 2015), or
                                      software included with many common commercial video capture boards (loopbio Motif). Video files
                                      can then be analyzed using a variety of open-­source tools.
                                          A common approach is to use methods for pose estimation, which track the position and orienta-
                                      tion of the animal. This is done by denoting a set of ‘keypoints’ or “landmarks” (body parts) in terms
                                      of pixel locations on frames in the video recordings. Packages for pose estimation provide graph-
                                      ical user interfaces for defining keypoints and the keypoints are then analyzed with video analysis
                                      methods. In the example shown in Figure 1, keypoints are the colored dots on the tip of the snout,
                                      the ears, forelimbs and paw, midpoint of back, hindlimbs and paws, and base, middle, and end of
                                      tail. Once body parts have been defined, computer algorithms are used to track the skeleton formed
                                      by the points and to track the position and orientation of the skeleton over frames in the video file.
                                      Many open-­source tools use machine learning methods for these intensive computational processes,
                                      which require GPUs to run in reasonable time. To run these analyses, many labs have either dedi-
                                      cated computers, institutional computing clusters, or cloud computing services such as Google Colab.
                                      The outputs of pose estimation can be analyzed to account for movement variability associated with
                                      different behaviors, to relate position and orientation to simultaneously collected brain activity (elec-
                                      trophysiology, optical imaging), or with algorithms that can describe and predict states and dynamical
                                      transitions of behaviors.


                                      Data acquisition
                                      The first step in setting up for video recording is to purchase a camera with an appropriate lens.
                                      Researchers should determine if they need precisely timed video frames, for example, for integration


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                 4 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                                   Neuroscience

                                      Table 1. Frequently used terms for video analysis.
                                      pose                        The configuration (position and/or orientation) of an animal, object, or body parts in
                                                                  an image or video recording

                                      keypoints/landmarks         Distinct identifiable morphological features (e.g., the tip of the snout or the base of
                                                                  the tail in a rodent) that can be localized in 2D or 3D from images, typically via pose
                                                                  estimation

                                      part grouping               A process for assigning keypoints to individual animals

                                      multi-­object tracking      In multi-­animal pose tracking, the task of determining which detected poses belong to
                                                                  which individual animal across time

                                      re-­identification          A process for identifying all images containing the same individual animal based
                                                                  primarily on their distinct appearance

                                      kinematics                  Information about the angles and velocities of a set of keypoints

                                      supervised learning         Machine learning methods that use experimenter-­provided labels (e.g., ground truth
                                                                  poses, or ‘running’ vs ‘grooming’) to train a predictive model

                                      unsupervised learning       Machine learning methods that only use unlabeled data to find patterns based on
                                                                  its intrinsic structure (e.g., clustering behavioral motifs based on the statistics of their
                                                                  dynamics)

                                      transfer learning           Machine learning methods that use models trained on one dataset to analyze other
                                                                  datasets (e.g., models of grooming in mice applied to rats)

                                      self-­supervised learning   Machine learning methods that use only unlabeled data for training by learning to
                                                                  solve artificially constructed tasks (e.g., comparing two variants of the same image with
                                                                  noise added against other images; predicting the future; or filling in blanks)

                                      embedding                   A representation of high-­dimensional data into lower dimensional representation

                                      lifting                     A process through which 2D pose data are converted to 3D representations

                                      behavioral segmentation     A process for detecting occurrences of behaviors (i.e., starting and ending frames)
                                                                  from video or pose sequences




                                      with electrical or optical recordings. Inexpensive USB webcams with frame rates of at least 30 fps are
                                      suitable for many neuroscience experiments. However, it is important to make sure that each camera
                                      is connected to a dedicated USB channel in the computer used for video recording. Webcam cameras
                                      can be a challenge to integrate with systems used for behavioral control and electrophysiology or
                                      imaging because they lack a means of precisely synchronizing video frames to other related data. As
                                      such, the timing of specific behaviors must be based on the animal’s location or an observable event
                                      in the video field (e.g., onset of an LED indicating reward availability).
                                          For more precise recordings, specialized cameras used in computer vision applications are needed
                                      (e.g., FLIR, Basler). Power and combined data over Ethernet (GigE PoE) is commonly used as it
                                      combines long cable length headroom with joint DC power delivery. Alternatively, USB3 cameras can
                                      be used, but have a maximum data cable length of 5 m, although active extender cables are available.
                                      Most machine vision cameras (GigE PoE or USB3) have general-­purpose input output capabilities that
                                      allow for time synchronization of multiple cameras with other laboratory equipment (e.g., electrical
                                      or optical recording system). A single camera running at high resolution or frame rate can quickly
                                      saturate a standard 1 Gbit Ethernet link. Therefore, it is important to consider the computer used to
                                      collect video data, ensuring that it has a fast processor with multiple cores and perhaps also a GPU,
                                      which can aid in handling video compression during data collection and can be used for off-­line anal-
                                      ysis using pose estimation methods.
                                          After choosing a camera, researchers must determine how to save and archive data from their
                                      recordings. By default, recorded videos from cameras may be in several formats, such as MP4
                                      (MPEG-­4 AVC/H. 264 encoding), MOV (MPEG-­4 encoding), and AVI (DivX codec, higher quality but
                                      larger file size). These formats are generally universal and can be read by a variety of tools. Gener-
                                      ally, video data files tend to be large (1 hr of RGB video at 30 Hz with resolution 1000×1000 can
                                      be 2–20 GB depending on compression) so data storage solutions for large-­scale experiments are
                                      crucial. File compression should be evaluated before a system is deployed, as the computer used for
                                      video recordings must have sufficient memory (RAM) to remain stable over long recording sessions.


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                                  5 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                    Neuroscience

                                      In addition to considerations of file formats and codecs, it is important to plan for data storage. Many
                                      labs maintain internal lab servers for their video data. Cloud storage is another option to enable
                                      sharing. For sharing data publicly, there are a variety of hosting services available, such as the Open
                                      Science Foundation, Figshare, and Dryad (see section on ‘Best practices for experimenters and devel-
                                      opers’ below for further comments on data archives and sharing).
                                          Once cameras and lenses are acquired and data formats and storage resolved, the next question is
                                      where to position the cameras relative to the experimental preparation. Occlusions due to obstacles,
                                      cables, or conspecifics will have effects on the usability of some video analysis methods. A bottom-­up
                                      view (from below the animal) works best in an open-­field, while a top-­down approach can be useful
                                      for studies in operant chambers and home cages. Bottom-­up views capture behavioral information
                                      from the position of the animal’s feet (Hsu and Yttri, 2021a; Luxem et al., 2022a). When multiple
                                      cameras are used, to reduce the effect of occlusion for downstream video analysis, cameras should be
                                      positioned such that at least one camera can visualize each keypoint at all times.
                                          It is also necessary to think about lighting for the experimental setup. If all or some of the study is
                                      to be performed while house lights are off, then infrared (IR) lighting and IR-­compatible cameras may
                                      be needed. One should consider if diffuse lighting will work or if modifications to eliminate reflec-
                                      tive surfaces (especially metals) are necessary. These can lead to artifacts in video recordings from
                                      devices like IR LEDs and other sources of illumination and complicate the training and interpretations
                                      of measures obtained with analyses such as pose estimation. For example, it is possible to reduce
                                      reflections from surfaces and objects that are in direct line with IR LEDs. For top-­down recordings,
                                      cage floors can be made from colored materials to provide contrast such as Delrin or pre-­anodized
                                      aluminum (an option for long-­term use) and the metal pans typically used below operant chambers to
                                      collect animal waste can be painted with flat black paint. Addressing these issues before beginning an
                                      experiment can greatly improve the quality of video recordings.
                                          Finally, for some applications, it is necessary to invest time in calibrating the video system. Cali-
                                      bration is often overlooked and not easily accessible in many current software packages. The intrinsic
                                      parameters of a camera include the focal length of the lens and if the lens has obvious distortions (i.e.,
                                      fisheye lens). Extrinsic parameters also affect the quality of video recordings and are largely due to
                                      the camera’s position in the scene. It is fairly easy to calibrate a single camera using a checkerboard
                                      or ArUco board. To do so, one sweeps a precalibrated board manually around the field of view of a
                                      camera and uses the extracted images to estimate the camera’s intrinsic parameters (focal length and
                                      distortions). This approach can scale easily to cameras with overlapping fields of view but becomes
                                      difficult if larger camera networks do not share extrinsic parameters or need to be repeatedly recal-
                                      ibrated (e.g., if one of the cameras is moved between experiments). If the environment has enough
                                      structure in it, structure from motion can estimate the intrinsic and extrinsic parameters by treating
                                      the multiple cameras as an exhaustive sweep of the environment. This process can be fully scripted
                                      and automatically performed on a daily basis leading to substantially increased reliability and precision
                                      in multi-­camera system performance. Several references on these topics include Bala et al., 2020;
                                      Rameau et al., 2022; Schönberger et al., 2016; Schonberger and Frahm, 2016.


                                      Hardware and software for data analysis
                                      Once video recordings are acquired, the researcher may proceed to setting up their computing envi-
                                      ronment for pose estimation and tracking. Modern markerless motion capture software tools like
                                      DeepLabCut (Mathis et al., 2018a) and SLEAP (Pereira et al., 2022) rely on deep learning to auto-
                                      mate this process. The most compute-­intensive step of these methods involves a ‘training’ stage in
                                      which a deep neural network is optimized to learn to predict poses from user-­provided examples.
                                      Training is typically accelerated with a GPU, a hardware component traditionally used for computer
                                      graphics, but which has been co-­opted for deep learning due to its massively parallel processing archi-
                                      tecture. Having a GPU can speed up training by 10- to 100-­fold, resulting in model training times in
                                      as little as minutes with lightweight network architectures (Pereira et al., 2022). For most researchers,
                                      the most practical option is to purchase a consumer-­grade workstation GPU which can be installed in
                                      conventional desktop computers to afford local access to this hardware from the pose tracking soft-
                                      ware. In this case, any recent NVIDIA GPU with greater than 6 GB of memory will suffice for practical
                                      use of pose estimation tools. This type of computer hardware has, in recent years, been significantly
                                      impacted by supply chain shortages, driving prices up to >$1000, which makes this a less accessible


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                   6 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                           Neuroscience




Figure 2. Pipeline for video analysis. Video recordings are analyzed with either keypoints from 2D or 3D pose estimation or directly by computing video
features. These videos or trajectory features are then used by downstream algorithms to relate the keypoints to behavioral constructs such as predicting
human-­defined behavior labels (supervised learning) or discovering behavior motifs (unsupervised learning). Each part of the analysis steps outlined in
the figure is described in more detail below.



                                      option for many labs just starting off in video analysis. For this situation, most tools provide the means
                                      for using Google Colab, which provides limited access to GPUs on the cloud. This is an excellent way
                                      to set up analysis workflows while getting familiar with deep learning-­based video analysis but may
                                      not be practical for sustained usage (e.g., processing 100 s of videos). Another common scenario is
                                      that institutions with a high-­performance computing center will typically have GPUs available as a local
                                      shared resource. Other than GPUs, most other computer requirements are modest (modern CPU,
                                      8–16 GB of RAM, minimal disk space).
                                         Researchers will need to set up their software environment to be able to install and use pose
                                      tracking tools. Most commonly available open-­source methods for pose estimation were developed
                                      using the Python language. It is highly recommended to make use of ‘environment managers’ such as
                                      Anaconda (‘conda’) which enable the creation of isolated installations of Python for each video anal-
                                      ysis method of interest. This allows for the methods to be installed with all its dependencies without
                                      affecting other Python libraries on the system. Alternatives include Docker, which allows for running
                                      an entire virtual machine in isolation. This is done to facilitate the installation of GPU-­related depen-
                                      dencies, which may be technically challenging for novice users.

                                      2D pose estimation and tracking
                                      Pose tracking methods (Figure 2, part 1) enable researchers to extract positional information about
                                      the body parts of animals from video recordings. Tools for pose tracking (see Table 2) decompose the
                                      problem of pose tracking into sub-­tasks outlined below. A note on nomenclature: pose estimation is


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                          7 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                              Neuroscience

Table 2. Methods for 2D pose estimation.
DeepLabCut           DeepLabCut (Mathis et al., 2018a; Mathis et al., 2018b) uses a popular architecture for deep learning (He et al., 2016), called
                     ResNet. DeepLabCut models are pre-­trained on a massive dataset for object recognition called ImageNet (Russakovsky et al.,
                     2015). Through a process called transfer learning, the DeepLabCut model learns the position of keypoints using as few as 200
                     labeled frames. This makes the model very robust and flexible in terms of what body parts (or objects) users want to label as the
                     model provides a strong backbone of image filters within their ResNet architecture. To detect the keypoint position, DeepLabCut
                     replaces the classification layer of the ResNet with deconvolutional layers to produce spatial probability densities from which the
                     model learns to assign high probabilities to regions with the user labeled keypoints. DeepLabCut can provide very accurate pose
                     estimations but can require extensive time for training.

SLEAP                SLEAP (Pereira et al., 2022) is based on an earlier method called LEAP (Pereira et al., 2022), which performed pose estimation
                     on single animals. SLEAP uses simpler CNN architectures with repeated convolutional and pooling layers. This makes the model
                     more lightweight compared to DLC’s ResNet architecture and, hence, the model is faster to train with comparable accuracy. Similar
                     to DeepLabCut, the model uses a stack of upsampling or deconvolutional layers to estimate confidence maps during training
                     and inference. Unlike DLC, SLEAP does not solely rely on transfer learning from general-­purpose network models (though this
                     functionality is also provided for flexible experimentation). Instead, it uses customizable neural network architectures that can be
                     tuned to the needs of the dataset. SLEAP can produce highly accurate pose estimates starting at about 100 labeled frames for
                     training combined and is quick to train on a GPU (<1 hour).

DeepPoseKit          DeepPoseKit (Graving et al., 2019a; Graving et al., 2019b) uses a type of CNN architecture, called stacked DenseNet, an efficient
                     variant of the stacked hourglass (Newell et al., 2016), and uses multiple down- and upsampling steps with densely connected
                     hourglass networks to produce confidence maps on the input image. The model uses only about 5% of the amount of parameters
                     used by DeepLabCut, providing speed improvements over DeepLabCut and LEAP.

B-KinD               B-­KinD (Sun et al., 2021a; Sun et al., 2021b) discovers key points without human supervision. B-­KinD has the potential to
                     transform how pose estimation is done, as keypoint analysis is one of the most time-­consuming aspects of doing pose estimation
                     analysis. However, there are challenges for the approach when occlusions occur in the video recordings, e.g., recordings of animals
                     tethered to brain recording systems.




                                       the term typically reserved to mean single-­animal keypoint localization within a single image; multi-­
                                       animal pose estimation refers to; multi-­animal pose estimation refers to keypoint localization and part
                                       grouping of multiple animals within a single image; and multi-­animal pose tracking refers to combined
                                       keypoint localization, part grouping, and identification across video frames.
                                           Keypoint localization involves recovering the spatial coordinates of each distinct keypoint. This
                                       is normally done by estimating body part confidence maps, that is, image-­based representations
                                       that encode the probability of the body part being located at each pixel. Recovering the coordi-
                                       nates of each body part is reduced to the task of finding the pixel with highest probability. A key
                                       consideration of this task is that the larger the image, the larger the confidence maps. Computer
                                       memory requirements can potentially exceed the capacity of most consumer-­grade GPUs. This can
                                       be compensated by reducing the resolution of the confidence maps, though this comes at the cost
                                       of potentially reduced accuracy. Subpixel refinement methods are typically employed to compensate
                                       for this, but ultimately confidence map resolution is one of the most impactful choices for achieving
                                       reliable keypoint localization.
                                           For single-­animal videos, there will be at most one instance of each keypoint type present in the
                                       image, so keypoint localization is the only step strictly required. For multi-­animal videos, however,
                                       there may be multiple instances of each keypoint type, for example, multiple ‘heads’. Part grouping
                                       refers to the task of determining the set of keypoint detections that belong to the same animal within
                                       an image. This is often approached in either a bottom-­up or top-­down fashion. In bottom-­up models,
                                       all parts are detected, the association between them estimated (e.g., by using part affinity fields:
                                       Cao et al., 2017), and then grouped. In top-­down models, the animals are detected, cropped out
                                       of the image, and then keypoints are located in the same fashion as in the single-­animal case. These
                                       approaches have specific trade-­offs. Analyses of bottom-­up recordings tend to be more memory-­
                                       intensive but also more robust to transient occlusions and work well with animals with relatively large
                                       bodies (e.g., rodents). By contrast, top-­down recordings tend to be analyzed in less time since only
                                       subsets of the image are processed. Top-­down views work best with smaller body types that have
                                       fewer complex occlusions (e.g., flies). A notable consideration is that all single-­animal pose estima-
                                       tion models can be used in the multi-­animal setting if the animals can be detected and cropped as a
                                       preprocessing step (Graving et al., 2019a; Pereira et al., 2019). While both methods will work on
                                       most types of data, drastic improvements in performance and accuracy can be obtained by selecting
                                       the appropriate one – most pose estimation tools allow users to select between each approach type.


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                             8 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                  Neuroscience

                                         Once animals are detected and their keypoints located within a frame, the remaining task in multi-­
                                      animal pose tracking is identification: repeatedly detecting the same animal across frame sequences.
                                      This can be approached as a multi-­object tracking (MOT) problem, where animals are matched across
                                      frames based on a model or assumption about motion; or a re-­identification (ReID) problem, where
                                      distinctive appearance features are used to unambiguously identify an animal. Both MOT and ReID
                                      (and hybrids) are available as standalone functionality in open-­source tools, as well as part of multi-­
                                      animal pose tracking packages. While MOT-­based approaches can function on videos of animals
                                      with nearly indistinguishable appearances, they are prone to the error propagation issue inherent
                                      in methods with temporal dependencies: switching an animal’s identity even once will mean it is
                                      wrong for all subsequent frames. This presents a potentially intractable problem for long-­term contin-
                                      uous recordings which may be impossible to manually proofread. ReID-­like methods circumvent this
                                      problem by detecting distinguishing visual features, though this may not be compatible with existing
                                      datasets or all experimental paradigms.
                                         The single most significant experimental consideration that will affect the identification problem
                                      is whether animals can be visually distinguished. A common experimental manipulation aimed at
                                      ameliorating this issue is to introduce visual markers to aid in unique identification of animals. This
                                      includes techniques such as grouping animals with different fur colors, painting them with non-­toxic
                                      dyes (Ohayon et al., 2013), or attaching barcode labels to a highly visible area of their body (Crall
                                      et al., 2015). Though an essential part of the pose tracking workflow, identification remains a chal-
                                      lenging problem in computer vision and its difficulty should not be underestimated when designing
                                      studies involving large numbers of interacting animals. We refer interested readers to previous reviews
                                      on multi-­animal tracking (Panadeiro et al., 2021; Pereira et al., 2020) for more comprehensive over-
                                      views of these topics.
                                         Tools that are based on deep learning work by training deep neural networks (models) to repro-
                                      duce human annotations of behavior. Methods that strictly depend on learning from human examples
                                      are referred to as fully supervised. In the case of animal pose tracking, these supervisory examples
                                      (labels) are provided in the form of images and the coordinates of the keypoints of each animal that
                                      can be found in them. Most pose tracking software tools fall within this designation and provide
                                      graphical interfaces to facilitate labeling. The usability of these interfaces is a crucial consideration
                                      as most of the time spent in setting up a pose tracking system will be devoted to manual labeling.
                                      The more examples and the greater their diversity, the better that pose tracking models will perform.
                                      Previous work has shown that hundreds to thousands of labeled examples may be required to achieve
                                      satisfactory results, with a single example taking as much as 2 min to manually label (Mathis et al.,
                                      2018a; Pereira et al., 2022; Pereira et al., 2019). To mitigate this, we strongly recommend adopting
                                      a human-­in-­the-­loop labeling workflow. This is a practice in which the user trains a model with few
                                      labels, generates (potentially noisy) predictions, and imports those predictions into the labeling inter-
                                      face for manual refinement before retraining the model. This can drastically reduce the amount of
                                      time taken to generate thousands of labeled images necessary for reliable pose estimation models.
                                         The rule of thumb is that ‘if you can see it, you can track it’, but this aphorism strongly depends on
                                      the examples provided to train the model. Important factors to consider in the labeling stage include
                                      labeling consistency and sample diversity. Labeling consistency involves minimizing the variability of
                                      keypoint placement within and across annotators which helps to ensure that models can learn general-
                                      izable rules for keypoint localization. This can be accomplished by formalizing a protocol for labeling,
                                      especially for ambiguous cases such as when an animal’s body part is occluded. For example, one
                                      convention may be to consistently place a ‘paw’ keypoint at the apex of the visible portion of the body
                                      rather than guessing where it may be located beneath an occluding object. Similarly, the principle of
                                      consistency should inform which body parts are selected as tracked keypoints. Body parts that are
                                      not easily located by the human eye will suffer from labeling inconsistency which may cause inferior
                                      overall performance as models struggle to find reliable solutions to detecting them. Sample diversity,
                                      on the other hand, refers to the notion that not all labeled examples have equal value when training
                                      neural networks. For example, labeling 1000 consecutive frames will ensure that the model is able
                                      to track data that looks similar to that segment of time, but will have limited capacity to generalize
                                      to data collected in a different session. As a best practice, labels should be sampled from the widest
                                      possible set of experimental conditions, time points, and imaging conditions that will be expected to
                                      be present in the final dataset.


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                9 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                    Neuroscience

                                          Improving the capability of models to generalize to new data with fewer (or zero) labels is a
                                      currently active area of research. Techniques such as transfer learning and self-­supervised learning aim
                                      to reduce the labeling burden by training models on related datasets or tasks. For example, B-­KinD
                                      (Sun et al., 2021a) is able to discover semantically meaningful keypoints in behavioral videos using
                                      self-­supervision without requiring human annotations. These approaches work by training models to
                                      solve similar problems and/or on similar data than those used for pose estimation, with the intuition
                                      that some of that knowledge can be reused and thereby will require fewer (or no) labeled examples
                                      before achieving the same performance as fully supervised equivalents. Future work in this domain
                                      is on track to produce reusable models for commonly encountered experimental species and condi-
                                      tions. We highly encourage practitioners to adopt open data and model sharing to facilitate these
                                      efforts where possible.


                                      3D pose estimation
                                      Several methods have emerged in recent years for 3D tracking based on pose data. For some appli-
                                      cations, it is of interest to track animals in complete 3D space. This affords a more detailed represen-
                                      tation of the kinematics by resolving ambiguities inherent in 2D projections – an especially desirable
                                      property when studying behaviors that involve significant out-­of-­plane movement, such as in large
                                      arenas or non-­terrestrial behaviors.
                                         It is important to note that 3D motion capture comes at a significant increase in technical complexity.
                                      As discussed above (see ‘Data acquisition’), camera synchronization and calibration are paramount
                                      for applications using 3D tracking as the result of this step will inform downstream algorithms as
                                      to the relative spatial configuration of the individual cameras. This step may be sensitive to small
                                      camera movements that occur during normal operation of behavioral monitoring systems, potentially
                                      requiring frequent recalibration. The number and positioning of cameras are also major determinants
                                      of 3D motion capture performance, both of which may depend on the specific behavior of interest,
                                      arena size and bandwidth, and computing capabilities on the acquisition computer. In some cases,
                                      it may be easiest to use mirrors instead of multiple cameras to allow for recording behavior from
                                      multiple perspectives.
                                         Given a calibrated camera system, several approaches have emerged that can enable 3D pose esti-
                                      mation in animals. The simplest approaches rely on using 2D poses detected in each camera view, such
                                      as those produced by SLEAP or DeepLabCut as described above, and then triangulating them into
                                      3D. 2D poses can be detected by training 2D pose models on each camera view independently, or by
                                      training a single model on all views, with varying results depending on how different the perspectives
                                      are. Once 2D poses can be obtained, methods such as Anipose (Karashchuk et al., 2021), Open-
                                      MonkeyStudio (Bala et al., 2020), and DeepFly3D (Günel et al., 2019) are able to leverage camera
                                      calibration information to project poses into 3D for triangulation. This involves optimizing for the best
                                      3D location of each keypoint that still maps back to the detected 2D location in each view. This can be
                                      further refined with temporal or spatial constraints, such as known limb lengths. Using this approach,
                                      more cameras will usually result in better triangulation, but will suffer (potentially catastrophically)
                                      when the initial 2D poses are incorrect. Since many viewpoints will have inherent ambiguities when
                                      not all body parts are visible, the 2D pose estimation error issue can be a major impediment to imple-
                                      menting 3D pose systems using the triangulation-­based approach.
                                         Alternative approaches attempt to circumvent triangulation entirely. LiftPose3D (Gosztolai et al.,
                                      2021) describes a method for predicting 3D poses from single 2D poses, a process known as lifting.
                                      While this eliminates the need for multiple cameras, it requires a dataset of known 3D poses from
                                      which the 2D-­3D correspondences can be obtained. This requirement depends on the multi-­camera
                                      system being similar to the target 2D systems. DANNCE (Dunn et al., 2021), on the other hand,
                                      achieves full 3D pose estimation by extending the standard 2D confidence map regression approach
                                      to 3D using volumetric convolutions. In their approach, images from each camera view are projected
                                      onto a common volume based on the calibration, before being fed into a 3D convolutional neural
                                      network that outputs a single volumetric part confidence map. This approach has the major advantage
                                      that it is not susceptible to 2D pose estimation errors since it solves for the 3D pose in a single step
                                      while also being able to reason about information present in distinct views. The trade-­offs with this
                                      approach are that it requires significantly more computational power due to the 3D convolutions, as
                                      well as requiring 2D ground truth annotations on multiple views for a given frame.


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                 10 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                            Neuroscience

                                          Overall, a practitioner should be mindful of the caveats with implementing 3D pose estimation and
                                      is recommended to consider whether the advantages are truly necessary given the added complexity.
                                      We note that at the time of writing, none of the above methods can natively support the multi-­animal
                                      case in 3D, other than by treating them as individual animals after preprocessing with a 2D multi-­
                                      animal method for pose estimation. This limitation is due to issues with part grouping and identifi-
                                      cation as outlined above and would seem to be a future area of growth for animal pose estimation.

                                      Behavior quantification
                                      After using pose estimation to quantify the movements of animal body parts, there are a number of
                                      analyses that can be used to understand how movements differ by experimental conditions (Figure 2,
                                      parts 2–4). A simple option is to use statistical methods such as ANOVA to assess effects on discrete
                                      experimental variables such as the time spent in a given location or the velocity of movement between
                                      locations. These measures can also be performed with data from simpler tracking methods, such as
                                      the commercially available EthoVision, TopScan, and ANY-­maze programs. The primary benefits of
                                      the open source pose estimation methods described in this paper over these commercially available
                                      programs are the richness of the data obtained from pose estimation (see Figure 1) and the flexibility
                                      and customization of behavioral features are tracked (see Figure 2).
                                         If researchers want to go beyond kinematic readouts and investigate the behavior an animal is
                                      executing in more detail, then methods for segmenting behavior from the pose tracking data can
                                      be used. Behavioral segmentation methods are available to discern discrete episodes of individual
                                      events and/or map video or trajectory data to continuous lower-­dimensional behavioral representa-
                                      tions. Discrete episodes have a defined start and end in which the animal is performing a particular
                                      behavior, while continuous representations represent behavior more smoothly over time. For discrete
                                      episodes, depending on the experimental conditions, these episodes can last from milliseconds up
                                      to minutes or longer. Segmentation can be done per animal, for example, detecting locomotion, or
                                      globally per frame, which is especially of interest for social behavior applications. In a global setting
                                      researcher might be interested in finding behavioral episodes that are directed between animals such
                                      as attacking or mounting behaviors.
                                         If one wants to understand sequences of behaviors, there are many methods available to embed
                                      pose data into lower-­dimensional representations. Such structures can be discovered through unsu-
                                      pervised methods. Some methods provide generic embeddings and do not explicitly model the
                                      dynamics of the behaving animal. Two examples of this approach are B-­SOiD (Hsu and Yttri, 2021a),
                                      which analyses pose data with unsupervised machine learning, and MotionMapper (Berman et al.,


Table 3. Methods for behavioral segmentation using pose data.
SimBA      SimBA (Nilsson et al., 2020a; Nilsson et al., 2020b) is a supervised learning pipeline for importing pose estimation data and a graphical
           interface for interacting with a popular machine learning algorithm called Random Forest (Breiman, 2001). SimBA was developed for
           studies in social behavior and aggression and has been shown to be able to discriminate between attack, pursuit, and threat behaviors in
           studies using rats and mice.

MARS       MARS (Segalin et al., 2021a; Segalin et al., 2021b) is another supervised learning pipeline developed for studies of social interaction
           behaviors in rodents, such as attacking, mounting, and sniffing, and uses the XGBoost gradient boosting classifier (Chen and Guestrin,
           2016).

B-SOiD     B-­SOiD (Hsu and Yttri, 2021a; Hsu and Yttri, 2021b) uses unsupervised methods to learn and discover the spatiotemporal features in
           pose data of ongoing behaviors, such as grooming and other naturalistic movements in rodents, flies, or humans. B-­SOiD uses UMAP
           embedding (McInnes et al., 2020) to account for dynamic features within video frames that are grouped using an algorithm for cluster
           analysis, HDBSCAN (McInnes et al., 2017). Clustered spatiotemporal features are then used to train a classifier (Random Forest; Breiman,
           2001) to detect behavioral classes in data sets that were not used to train the model and with millisecond precision.

VAME       VAME (Luxem et al., 2022a; Luxem et al., 2022b) uses self-­supervised deep learning models to infer the full range of behavioral dynamics
           based on the animal movements from pose data. The variational autoencoder framework (Kingma and Welling, 2019) is used to learn a
           generative model. An encoder network learns a representation from the original data space into a latent space. A decoder network learns
           to decode samples from this space back into the original data space. The encoder and decoder are parameterized with recurrent neural
           networks. Once trained, the learned latent space is parameterized by a Hidden Markov Model to obtain behavioral motifs.

TREBA      TREBA (Sun et al., 2021c; Sun et al., 2021d) relates measures from pose estimation to other quantitative or qualitative data associated
           with each frame in a video recording. Similar to VAME, a neural network is trained to learn to predict movement trajectories in an
           unsupervised manner. TREBA can then incorporate behavioral attributes, such as movement speed, distance traveled, and heuristic labels
           for behavior (e.g., sniffing, mounting, attacking) into representations of the pose estimation data learned by its neural networks, thereby
           bringing aspects of supervised learning. This is achieved using a technique called task programming.




Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                          11 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                   Neuroscience

                                      2014), a method that does not use pose estimation methods. These models embed data points
                                      based on feature dynamics (e.g., distance, speed) into a lower-­dimensional space. Within this space
                                      it is possible to apply clustering algorithms for the segmentation of behavioral episodes. Generally,
                                      dense regions in this space (regions with many data points grouped together) are considered to be
                                      conserved behaviors. Other methods are aimed at explicitly capturing structure from the dynamics
                                      (Batty et al., 2019; Bregler, 1997; Costa et al., 2019; Luxem et al., 2022a; Shi et al., 2021; Sun
                                      et al., 2021c). These models learn a continuous embedding that can be used to identify lower-­
                                      dimensional trajectory dynamics that can be correlated to neuronal activity and segmented in relation
                                      to significant behavioral events.
                                          Behavioral segmentation and other methods for quantification require a similar computing envi-
                                      ronment to that used for pose estimation. The input to those methods is generally the output of a
                                      pose estimation method (i.e., keypoint coordinates) or time series from a dimensionality reduction
                                      method such as principal component analysis that accounts for the keypoints or the raw video. It is
                                      crucial that pose estimation is accurate as the segmentation capabilities of the subsequent methods is
                                      bounded by pose tracking quality. Highly noisy key points will drown out biological signals and make
                                      the segmentation results hard to interpret, especially for unsupervised methods. Furthermore, iden-
                                      tity switches between virtual markers can be catastrophic for multi-­animal tracking and segmentation.
                                      A summary of methods for behavioral segmentation is provided in Table 3.
                                          Before selecting any approach to segment animal behavior, it is important to first define the desired
                                      outcome. If the goal is to identify episodes of well-­defined behaviors like rearing or walking, then
                                      the most straightforward approach is to use a supervised method. Moreover, it is generally a good
                                      starting point to use a supervised learning approach and the outputs of these models can be layered
                                      on top of unsupervised models to give them immediate interpretability. One tradeoff, however, is
                                      the extensive training datasets that are often required to ensure good supervised segmentation.
                                      Such methods can be established quite easily using standard machine learning libraries available for
                                      the Python, R, and MATLAB, if one has already experience in building these methods. Alternatively,
                                      open-­source packages such as SimBA (Nilsson et al., 2020a) or MARS (Segalin et al., 2021a) can be
                                      used, and is especially beneficial for those who are relatively new to the topic of machine learning.
                                      However, if the researcher wants to understand more about the spatiotemporal structure of the
                                      behaving animal, they either need to label many different behaviors within the video or turn to unsu-
                                      pervised methods. Unsupervised methods offer the advantage to identify clusters in the video or
                                      keypoint time series and quantify behavior in each frame. Recently, A-­SOiD, an active-­learning algo-
                                      rithm, iteratively combines these supervised and unsupervised approaches to reduce the amount of
                                      training data required and enable the discovery of additional behavior and structure (Schweihoff
                                      et al., 2022).
                                          Interpreting the lower-­dimensional structures in a 2D/3D projection plot can be difficult and it
                                      is advised to visualize examples from this projection space. Generative methods like VAME offer
                                      the possibility to sample cluster categories from this embedding space to qualitatively check if
                                      similar patterns are learned. Another task unsupervised methods are capable of is fingerprinting.
                                      Here, the embedding space is used as a signature to discern general changes in phenotypes
                                      (Wiltschko et al., 2020). An alternative to using an explicitly supervised or unsupervised approach
                                      is to combine these approaches (semi-­supervised), as implemented in a package called TREBA
                                      (Sun et al., 2021c). TREBA uses generative modeling in addition to incorporating behavioral attri-
                                      butes, such as movement speed, distance traveled, or heuristic labels for behavior (e.g., sniffing,
                                      mounting, attacking) into learned behavioral representations. It has been used in a number of
                                      different experimental contexts, most notably for understanding social interactions between
                                      animals.
                                          Finally, as behavior is highly hierarchically structured, multiple spatio-­temporal scales of descrip-
                                      tion may be desired, for example, to account for bouts of locomotion and transitions running to
                                      escaping behavior (Berman, 2018). It is possible to create a network representation and identify
                                      ‘cliques’ or ‘communities’ on the resulting graph (Luxem et al., 2022a; Markowitz et al., 2018).
                                      These descriptions represent human identifiable behavioral categories within highly interconnected
                                      sub-­second segments of behavior. These representations can provide insights into the connection
                                      between different behavioral states and the transitions between states and their biological meaning.


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                12 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                    Neuroscience

                                      Best practices for experimenters and developers
                                      Having described how to set up and use video recording methods and analysis methods for pose
                                      estimation, we would like to close by discussing some best practices in the use and development
                                      of methods for video analysis, including recommendations for the open sharing of video data and
                                      analysis code.

                                      Best practices for experimenters
                                      For those using video analysis methods in a laboratory setting, there are several key issues that should
                                      be followed as best practices. It is most crucial to develop a means of storing files in a manner in which
                                      they can be accessed in the lab, through cloud computing resources, and in data archives. These
                                      issues are discussed above in the ‘Hardware and software for data analysis’ section of this paper.
                                      Documentation of hardware is also a key best practice. All methods sections of manuscripts that use
                                      methods for video analysis should include details on the camera and lens that were used, the locations
                                      of and distances from the cameras relative to the behavioral arena, the acquisition rate and image
                                      resolution, environmental lighting (e.g., IR grids placed above the behavioral arena), properties of the
                                      arena (size, material, color, etc.).
                                          Beyond within-­lab data management and reporting details on hardware used in research manu-
                                      scripts, more widespread sharing of video data is very much needed and is a core aspect of best prac-
                                      tices for experimenters. In accordance with the demands of funders such as the NIH for data sharing,
                                      the open sharing of raw and processed videos and pose tracking data is crucial for research reproduc-
                                      ibility and also for training new users on video methods. Several groups have created repositories to
                                      address this need (Computational Behavior, OpenBehavior). With widespread use, these repositories
                                      will help new users learn the required methods for data analysis, enable new analyses of existing
                                      datasets that could lead to new findings without having to do new experiments, and would enable
                                      comparisons of existing and newly developed methods for pose estimation and behavioral quantifica-
                                      tion. The latter benefit of data sharing could lead to insight into a major open question about methods
                                      for animal pose estimation: how choices about the parameters of any method for pose estimation or
                                      subsequent analysis impact analysis time, accuracy, and generalizability. Without these resources, it
                                      has not been possible to make confident statements about how existing methods compare across
                                      a wide range of datasets involving multiple types of research animals and in different experimental
                                      contexts. Guidance for how to implement data sharing can be found in several existing efforts of the
                                      machine learning community (Gebru et al., 2021; Hutchinson et al., 2021; Stoyanovich and Howe,
                                      2019). A more widespread use of these frameworks for sharing data can improve the transparency
                                      and accessibility of research data for video analysis.

                                      Best practices for developers
                                      We recommend three topics receive more attention by developers of methods for video analysis.
                                      First, there is a need for a common file format for storing results from pose estimation. Second, there
                                      is a need for methods to compare pose estimation packages and assess the impact of the parameters
                                      of each package on performance in terms of accuracy and user time. Third, there is a need for better
                                      code documentation and analysis reproducibility. Each of these issues is discussed below. In addition
                                      to these topics, we would like to encourage developers to design interfaces to make their tools more
                                      accessible to novice users. This will allow the tools to become more widely used and studied, and will
                                      further not limit use of the tools to researchers with advanced technical skills such as programming.
                                          First, it is important to point out that there is no common and efficient data format available for
                                      tools that enable pose estimation in animal research. Such a format would allow users to compare
                                      methods without having to recode their video data. The FAIR data principles (Wilkinson et al., 2016)
                                      are particularly apt for developing a common data format for video due to the large heterogeneity
                                      of data sources, intermediate analysis outputs, and end goals of the study. These principles call for
                                      data to be Findable (available in searchable repositories and with persistent and citable identifiers
                                      [DOIs]), Accessible (easily retrieved using the Internet), Interoperable (having a common set of terms
                                      to describe video data across datasets), and Reusable (containing information about the experimental
                                      conditions and outputs of any analysis or model to allow another group to readily make use of the
                                      data). A common file format for saving raw and processed video recordings and data from pose esti-
                                      mation models is needed to address these issues.


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                 13 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                   Neuroscience

                                          Second, there has also been a general lack of direct comparisons of different methods and
                                      parameter exploration within a given method on a standard set of videos. The choice of deep
                                      learning method and specific hyperparameters can affect the structural biases embedded in video
                                      data, thereby affecting the effectiveness of a given method (Sculley et al., 2015). Yet, it seems
                                      that many users stick to default parameters available in popular packages. For example, in pose
                                      estimation, certain properties of neural network architectures such as its maximum receptive field
                                      size can dramatically impact the performance across species owing to the variability in morpho-
                                      logical features (Pereira et al., 2022). In addition to the intrinsic properties of particular species
                                      (e.g., Hayden et al., 2022), the analysis type will also dictate the importance of particular parame-
                                      ters on the task performance. For example, algorithms that achieve temporal smoothness in pose
                                      tracking are crucial for studies of fine motor control (Wu et al., 2020), but perhaps not as essential
                                      as preventing identity swaps for studies of social behavior (Pereira et al., 2022; Segalin et al.,
                                      2021a). Another important issue is that most methods do not report well-­calibrated measures of
                                      the confidence of model fits or predictions. This is important as it has become clear that machine
                                      learning tools tend to be overconfident in their predictions (Abdar et al., 2021). Establishing stan-
                                      dardized, interoperable data formats and datasets that include estimates of the fitted models and
                                      their predictions will enable comprehensive comparisons of existing and new methods for pose
                                      estimation and behavioral quantification.
                                          For evaluating specific methods on lab-­specific data, appropriate metrics and baseline methods for
                                      the research questions should be chosen. There may be cases where comparable baseline methods
                                      may not exist. For example, if a lab develops a new method for quantifying behavior for a specific
                                      organism or task on a lab-­specific dataset, and there are no existing studies for that task. However,
                                      if related methods exist, it would be beneficial to compare performance of the new method against
                                      existing methods to study the advantages and disadvantages of the method. For more general claims
                                      (e.g., state-­of-­the-­art pose estimator across organisms), evaluations on existing datasets and compar-
                                      isons with baselines is important (see Table 4), to demonstrate the generality of the method and
                                      improvements over existing methods. A consensus on a standard set of data in the community for
                                      evaluation and an expansion to include more widely used behavioral tasks and assays would facili-
                                      tate general model development and comparison. We show existing datasets in the community for
                                      method development in Table 4 and encourage the community to continue to open-­source data and
                                      expand this list of available datasets to accelerate model development.
                                          Third, reproducibility of results is crucial for acceptance of new methods for video analysis within
                                      the research community and for research transparency. Guidance for documenting the details of
                                      models and algorithms can be obtained from the Machine Learning Reproducibility Checklist. It is
                                      applicable to any computational model in general. Importantly, the checklist calls for including the
                                      range of hyperparameters considered for experiments, mean and variance of results from multiple
                                      runs, and an explanation of how samples were allocated for train/validation/test. Further guid-
                                      ance for sharing code is available in this GitHub resource: Publishing Research Code. It provides
                                      tips on open-­sourcing research code, including specifications of code dependencies, training and
                                      evaluation code, and including pre-­trained models as part of any code repository. Beyond these
                                      resources, we note that there is also a broader definition of reproducibility in that experiments
                                      should be robustly reproducible: experimental results should ideally not vary significantly under
                                      minor perturbations. For example, even if there are minor variations to lighting or arena size from
                                      the original experiments, the video analysis results should not change significantly. A framework to
                                      ensure robust reproducibility is currently an open question, but the existing frameworks should facil-
                                      itate producing the same results under the same experimental conditions. Model interpretability is
                                      another important consideration depending on the purpose of the video analysis experiment. Many
                                      machine learning models are ‘black box’ models, and not easily interpretable; as such, post hoc
                                      explanations may not always be reliable (Rudin, 2019). One way to generate human-­interpretable
                                      models is through program synthesis (Balog et al., 2017) and neurosymbolic learning (Sun et al.,
                                      2022; Zhan et al., 2021). These methods learn compositions of symbolic primitives, which are
                                      closer in form to human-­constructed models than neural networks. Interpretable models can facil-
                                      itate reproducibility and trustworthiness in model predictions for scientific applications. Efforts at
                                      deploying these approaches for methods for video analysis and behavioral quantification are very
                                      much needed.


Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                14 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                               Neuroscience

                                      Table 4. Datasets for model development.
                                      Dataset                           Task                       Setting                     Organism

                                      Human3.6M                         2D/3D Pose Estimation      Videos from 4 camera        Human (single-­agent)
                                                                                                   views with poses from
                                                                                                   motion capture

                                      MS COCO                           2D Pose Estimation         Images from uncontrolled Human (multi-­agent)
                                                                                                   settings with annotated
                                                                                                   poses

                                      PoseTrack                         2D Pose Estimation &       Videos from crowded         Human (multi-­agent)
                                                                        Tracking                   scenes with annotated
                                                                                                   poses

                                      AP-10K                            2D Pose Estimation         Images of diverse animal Diverse species (single &
                                                                                                   species with annotated   multi-­agent)
                                                                                                   poses

                                      MARS                              2D Pose Estimation         Videos from 2 camera        Mouse (multi-­agent)
                                                                                                   views with annotated
                                                                                                   poses

                                      3D-ZEF                            2D/3D Pose Estimation & Videos from 2 camera           Zebrafish (multi-­agent)
                                                                        Tracking                views with annotated
                                                                                                poses

                                      OpenMonkeyStudio                  2D/3D Pose Estimation      Images with annotated       Monkey (single-­agent)
                                                                                                   poses from a 62 camera
                                                                                                   setup

                                      PAIR-R24M                         2D/3D Pose Estimation & Videos from 12 camera          Rat (multi-­agent)
                                                                        Tracking                views with poses from
                                                                                                motion capture

                                      3DPW                              2D/3D Pose Estimation & Videos from moving             Human (multi-­agent)
                                                                        Tracking                phone camera in
                                                                                                challenging outdoor
                                                                                                settings

                                      3DHP                              2D/3D Pose Estimation      Videos from 14 camera       Human (single-­agent)
                                                                                                   views with poses from
                                                                                                   motion capture

                                      Rat 7M                            2D/3D Pose Estimation      Videos from 12 camera       Rat (single-­agent)
                                                                                                   views with poses from
                                                                                                   motion capture

                                      Kinetics                          Video-­level Action        Videos from uncontrolled Human (single & agent,
                                                                        Classification             settings that cover 700  may interact with other
                                                                                                   human actions            organisms/objects)

                                      NTU-RGBD                          Video-­level Action        Videos from 80 views and Human (single & multi-­
                                                                        Classification (also has   depth with 60 human      agent)
                                                                        3D poses)                  actions

                                      MultiTHUMOS                       Frame-­level Action        Videos from uncontrolled Human (single & multi-­
                                                                        Classification             settings with 65 action  agent)
                                                                                                   classes

                                      CRIM13                            Frame-­level Behavior      Videos from 2 views,        Mouse (multi-­agent)
                                                                        Classification             with 13 annotated social
                                                                                                   behaviors

                                      Fly vs. Fly                       Frame-­level Behavior      Videos & trajectory, with   Fly (multi-­agent)
                                                                        Classification (also has   10 annotated social
                                                                        2D poses)                  behaviors

                                      CalMS21                           Frame-­level Behavior      Videos & trajectory, with   Mouse (multi-­agent)
                                                                        Classification (also has   10 annotated social
                                                                        2D poses)                  behaviors

                                      MABe                              Frame-­level Behavior      Top-­down views, 7          Mouse (multi-­agent)
                                                                        Classification (also has   annotated keypoints,
                                                                        2D poses)                  hundreds of videos




Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                              15 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                       Neuroscience

                                      Summary
                                      We hope that our review of the current state of open-­source tools for behavioral video analysis will be
                                      helpful to the community. We described how to set up video methods in a lab, provided an overview
                                      on currently available methods, and provided guidance for best practices in using and developing
                                      the methods. As newer tools emerge and more research groups become proficient at using available
                                      methods, there is a clear potential for the tools to help with advancing our understanding of the
                                      neural basis of behavior.


                                      Acknowledgements
                                      This paper emerged from a working group on methods for video analysis organized by the Open-
                                      Behavior project in the summer and fall of 2021. Ann Kennedy, Greg Corder, and Sam Golden were
                                      major contributors to the working group and their ideas impacted this manuscript. We would like to
                                      thank Ann Kennedy, Samantha White, and Jensen Palmer for helpful comments on the manuscript.
                                      NSERC Award #PGSD3-­532647-­2019 to JJS; NIH MH002952 for SPB; NIH MH124042 for KK; NIH
                                      MH128177 and NSF 2024581 to JZ; NSF 1948181 and NIH DA046375 to ML.



                                      Additional information

                                      Funding
                                      Funder                       Grant reference number      Author

                                      National Science             1948181                     Mark Laubach
                                      Foundation

                                      National Institutes of       DA046375                    Mark Laubach
                                      Health

                                      Natural Sciences and         PGSD3-532647-2019           Jennifer J Sun
                                      Engineering Research
                                      Council of Canada

                                      National Institutes of       MH002952                    Sean P Bradley
                                      Health

                                      National Institutes of       MH124042                    Keerthi Krishnan
                                      Health

                                      National Institutes of       MH128177                    Jan Zimmermann
                                      Health

                                      National Science             2024581                     Jan Zimmermann
                                      Foundation

                                      The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the
                                      decision to submit the work for publication.


                                      Author contributions
                                      Kevin Luxem, Jennifer J Sun, Sean P Bradley, Keerthi Krishnan, Eric Yttri, Jan Zimmermann, Talmo
                                      D Pereira, Conceptualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing; Mark Laubach,
                                      Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Writing - original draft, Project administration, Writing -
                                      review and editing

                                      Author ORCIDs
                                      Jennifer J Sun ‍ ‍http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0906-6589
                                      Talmo D Pereira ‍ ‍http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9075-8365
                                      Mark Laubach ‍ ‍http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2403-4497


                                      References
                                      Abdar M, Pourpanah F, Hussain S, Rezazadegan D, Liu L, Ghavamzadeh M, Fieguth P, Cao X, Khosravi A,
                                       Acharya UR, Makarenkov V, Nahavandi S. 2021. A review of uncertainty quantification in deep learning:



Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                        16 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                           Neuroscience

                                        techniques, applications and challenges. Information Fusion 76:243–297. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.​
                                        2021.05.008
                                      Anderson DJ, Perona P. 2014. Toward a science of computational ethology. Neuron 84:18–31. DOI: https://doi.​
                                        org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.09.005, PMID: 25277452
                                      Bala PC, Eisenreich BR, Yoo SBM, Hayden BY, Park HS, Zimmermann J. 2020. Automated markerless pose
                                        estimation in freely moving macaques with openmonkeystudio. Nature Communications 11:4560. DOI: https://​
                                        doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-18441-5, PMID: 32917899
                                      Balog M, Gaunt AL, Brockschmidt M, Nowozin S, Tarlow D. 2017. DeepCoder: Learning to Write Programs.
                                        [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1611.​01989
                                      Batty E, Whiteway M, Saxena S, Biderman D, Abe T, Musall S, Gillis W, Markowitz J, Churchland A,
                                        Cunningham JP, Datta SR, Linderman S, Paninski L. 2019. BehaveNet: nonlinear embedding and bayesian
                                        neural decoding of behavioral videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. .
                                      Behnke S. 2003. Hierarchical neural networks for image interpretation. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. DOI: https://​
                                        doi.org/10.1007/b11963
                                      Ben-­Shaul Y. 2017. OptiMouse: a comprehensive open source program for reliable detection and analysis of
                                        mouse body and nose positions. BMC Biology 15:41. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12915-017-0377-3, PMID:
                                        28506280
                                      Berman GJ, Choi DM, Bialek W, Shaevitz JW. 2014. Mapping the stereotyped behaviour of freely moving fruit
                                        flies. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface 11:20140672. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2014.0672, PMID:
                                        25142523
                                      Berman GJ. 2018. Measuring behavior across scales. BMC Biology 16:23. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12915-​
                                        018-0494-7, PMID: 29475451
                                      Bradski G. 2000. The OpenCV library. Dr Dobb’s Journal of Software Tools 120:122–125.
                                      Bregler C. 1997. Learning and recognizing human dynamics in video sequences. Presented at the Proceedings of
                                        IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 568–574. DOI: https://doi.​
                                        org/10.1109/CVPR.1997.609382
                                      Breiman L. 2001. Random forests. Machine Learning 45:5–32. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010933404324
                                      Cao Z, Simon T, Wei SE, Sheikh Y. 2017. Realtime Multi-­person 2D Pose Estimation Using Part Affinity Fields.
                                        2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). Honolulu, HI, 7291–7299. DOI:
                                        https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.143
                                      Chen T, Guestrin C. 2016. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1603.​02754
                                      Chen Z, Zhang R, Eva Zhang Y, Zhou H, Fang HS, Rock RR, Bal A, Padilla-­Coreano N, Keyes L, Tye KM, Lu C.
                                        2020. AlphaTracker: A Multi-­Animal Tracking and Behavioral Analysis Tool. [bioRxiv]. DOI: https://doi.org/10.​
                                        1101/2020.12.04.405159
                                      Costa AC, Ahamed T, Stephens GJ. 2019. Adaptive, locally linear models of complex dynamics. PNAS 116:1501–
                                        1510. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1813476116, PMID: 30655347
                                      Cowen SL, Davis GA, Nitz DA. 2012. Anterior cingulate neurons in the rat MAP anticipated effort and reward to
                                        their associated action sequences. Journal of Neurophysiology 107:2393–2407. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/​
                                        jn.01012.2011, PMID: 22323629
                                      Crall JD, Gravish N, Mountcastle AM, Combes SA. 2015. BEEtag: a low-­cost, image-­based tracking system for
                                        the study of animal behavior and locomotion. PLOS ONE 10:e0136487. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.​
                                        pone.0136487, PMID: 26332211
                                      Davidson TL, Capaldi ED, Myers DE. 1980. Effects of reward magnitude on running speed following a
                                        deprivation upshift. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 15:150–152. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3758/​
                                        BF03334493
                                      Dunn TW, Marshall JD, Severson KS, Aldarondo DE, Hildebrand DGC, Chettih SN, Wang WL, Gellis AJ,
                                        Carlson DE, Aronov D, Freiwald WA, Wang F, Ölveczky BP. 2021. Geometric deep learning enables 3D
                                        kinematic profiling across species and environments. Nature Methods 18:564–573. DOI: https://doi.org/10.​
                                        1038/s41592-021-01106-6, PMID: 33875887
                                      Dutta A, Zisserman A. 2019. The VIA Annotation Software for Images, Audio and Video. MM ’19. Nice France,
                                        2276–2279. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3343031.3350535
                                      Feierstein CE, Quirk MC, Uchida N, Sosulski DL, Mainen ZF. 2006. Representation of spatial goals in rat
                                        orbitofrontal cortex. Neuron 51:495–507. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2006.06.032, PMID: 16908414
                                      Gebru T, Morgenstern J, Vecchione B, Vaughan JW, Wallach H, Iii HD, Crawford K. 2021. Datasheets for
                                        datasets. Communications of the ACM 64:86–92. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3458723
                                      Gosztolai A, Günel S, Lobato-­Ríos V, Pietro Abrate M, Morales D, Rhodin H, Fua P, Ramdya P. 2021. LiftPose3D,
                                        a deep learning-­based approach for transforming two-­dimensional to three-­dimensional poses in laboratory
                                        animals. Nature Methods 18:975–981. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-021-01226-z, PMID: 34354294
                                      Graving JM, Chae D, Naik H, Li L, Koger B, Costelloe BR, Couzin ID. 2019a. DeepPoseKit, a software toolkit for
                                        fast and robust animal pose estimation using deep learning. eLife 8:e47994. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/​
                                        eLife.47994, PMID: 31570119
                                      Graving JM, Chae D, Naik H, Li L, Koger B, Costelloe BR, Couzin ID. 2019b. DeepPoseKit. v0.3.6. Github.
                                        https://github.com/jgraving/DeepPoseKit
                                      Günel S, Rhodin H, Morales D, Campagnolo J, Ramdya P, Fua P. 2019. DeepFly3D, a deep learning-­based
                                        approach for 3D limb and appendage tracking in tethered, adult Drosophila. eLife 8:e48571. DOI: https://doi.​
                                        org/10.7554/eLife.48571, PMID: 31584428



Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                         17 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                           Neuroscience

                                      Hayden BY, Park HS, Zimmermann J. 2022. Automated pose estimation in primates. American Journal of
                                        Primatology 84:e23348. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ajp.23348, PMID: 34855257
                                      He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J. 2016. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2016 IEEE Conference on
                                        Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). Las Vegas, NV, USA, 770–778. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/​
                                        CVPR.2016.90
                                      Hsu AI, Yttri EA. 2021a. B-­SOiD, an open-­source unsupervised algorithm for identification and fast prediction of
                                        behaviors. Nature Communications 12:5188. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25420-x, PMID:
                                        34465784
                                      Hsu AI, Yttri EA. 2021b. B-­SOID. 3.0. Github. https://github.com/YttriLab/B-SOID
                                      Hutchinson B, Smart A, Hanna A, Denton E, Greer C, Kjartansson O, Barnes P, Mitchell M. 2021. Towards
                                        Accountability for Machine Learning Datasets. FAccT ’21. Virtual Event Canada, 560–575. DOI: https://doi.org/​
                                        10.1145/3442188.3445918
                                      Kabra M, Robie AA, Rivera-­Alba M, Branson S, Branson K. 2013. JAABA: interactive machine learning for
                                        automatic annotation of animal behavior. Nature Methods 10:64–67. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.​
                                        2281, PMID: 23202433
                                      Kane GA, Lopes G, Saunders JL, Mathis A, Mathis MW. 2020. Real-­Time, low-­latency closed-­loop feedback using
                                        markerless posture tracking. eLife 9:e61909. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.61909, PMID: 33289631
                                      Karashchuk P, Rupp KL, Dickinson ES, Walling-­Bell S, Sanders E, Azim E, Brunton BW, Tuthill JC. 2021. Anipose:
                                        a toolkit for robust markerless 3D pose estimation. Cell Reports 36:109730. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.​
                                        celrep.2021.109730, PMID: 34592148
                                      Keshavarzi S, Bracey EF, Faville RA, Campagner D, Tyson AL, Lenzi SC, Branco T, Margrie TW. 2022.
                                        Multisensory coding of angular head velocity in the retrosplenial cortex. Neuron 110:532–543.. DOI: https://​
                                        doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2021.10.031, PMID: 34788632
                                      Kingma DP, Welling M. 2019. An introduction to variational autoencoders. Foundations and Trends in Machine
                                        Learning 12:307–392. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1561/2200000056
                                      Krakauer JW, Ghazanfar AA, Gomez-­Marin A, MacIver MA, Poeppel D. 2017. Neuroscience needs behavior:
                                        correcting a reductionist bias. Neuron 93:480–490. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.12.041, PMID:
                                        28182904
                                      Lardeux S, Pernaud R, Paleressompoulle D, Baunez C. 2009. Beyond the reward pathway: coding reward
                                        magnitude and error in the rat subthalamic nucleus. Journal of Neurophysiology 102:2526–2537. DOI: https://​
                                        doi.org/10.1152/jn.91009.2008, PMID: 19710371
                                      Lauer J, Zhou M, Ye S, Menegas W, Nath T, Rahman MM, Di Santo V, Soberanes D, Feng G, Murthy VN,
                                        Lauder G, Dulac C, Mathis MW, Mathis A. 2021. Multi-­Animal Pose Estimation and Tracking with DeepLabCut.
                                        [bioRxiv]. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.30.442096
                                      Lopes G, Bonacchi N, Frazão J, Neto JP, Atallah BV, Soares S, Moreira L, Matias S, Itskov PM, Correia PA,
                                        Medina RE, Calcaterra L, Dreosti E, Paton JJ, Kampff AR. 2015. Bonsai: an event-­based framework for
                                        processing and controlling data streams. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 9:7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.​
                                        2015.00007, PMID: 25904861
                                      Luxem K, Mocellin P, Fuhrmann F, Kürsch J, Miller SR, Palop JJ, Remy S, Bauer P. 2022a. Identifying behavioral
                                        structure from deep variational embeddings of animal motion. Communications Biology 5:1267. DOI: https://​
                                        doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-04080-7, PMID: 36400882
                                      Luxem K, Mocellin P, Fuhrmann F, Kürsch J, Miller SR, Palop JJ, Remy S, Bauer P. 2022b. VAME. 3.0. Github.
                                        https://github.com/LINCellularNeuroscience/VAME
                                      Markowitz JE, Gillis WF, Beron CC, Neufeld SQ, Robertson K, Bhagat ND, Peterson RE, Peterson E, Hyun M,
                                        Linderman SW, Sabatini BL, Datta SR. 2018. The striatum organizes 3D behavior via moment-­to-­moment action
                                        selection. Cell 174:44–58.. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.04.019, PMID: 29779950
                                      Marr D, Nishihara HK, Brenner S. 1978. Representation and recognition of the spatial organization of three-­
                                        dimensional shapes. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological Sciences 200:269–294.
                                        DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.1978.0020
                                      Mathis A, Mamidanna P, Cury KM, Abe T, Murthy VN, Mathis MW, Bethge M. 2018a. DeepLabCut: markerless
                                        pose estimation of user-­defined body parts with deep learning. Nature Neuroscience 21:1281–1289. DOI:
                                        https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0209-y, PMID: 30127430
                                      Mathis A, Mamidanna P, Cury KM, Abe T, Murthy VN, Mathis MW, Bethge M. 2018b. DeepLabCut. 3.0. Github.
                                        https://github.com/DeepLabCut/DeepLabCut
                                      McInnes L, Healy J, Astels S. 2017. Hdbscan: hierarchical density based clustering. The Journal of Open Source
                                        Software 2:205. DOI: https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.00205
                                      McInnes L, Healy J, Melville J. 2020. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension
                                        Reduction. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1802.​03426
                                      Musall S, Kaufman MT, Juavinett AL, Gluf S, Churchland AK. 2019. Single-­trial neural dynamics are dominated by
                                        richly varied movements. Nature Neuroscience 22:1677–1686. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-019-0502-​
                                        4, PMID: 31551604
                                      Nevatia K, Binford TO. 1973. Structured descriptions of complex objects. Proceedings of the 3rd international
                                        joint conference on artificial intelligence, IJCAI’73. 641–647.
                                      Newell A, Yang K, Deng J. 2016. Stacked Hourglass Networks for Human Pose Estimation. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​
                                        org/​abs/​1603.​06937
                                      Nilsson SR, Goodwin NL, Choong JJ, Hwang S, Wright HR, Norville ZC, Tong X, Lin D, Bentzley BS, Eshel N,
                                        McLaughlin RJ, Golden SA. 2020a. Simple Behavioral Analysis (SimBA) – An Open Source Toolkit for Computer



Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                        18 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                           Neuroscience

                                        Classification of Complex Social Behaviors in Experimental Animals. [bioRxiv]. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/​
                                        2020.04.19.049452
                                      Nilsson SR, Goodwin NL, Choong JJ, Hwang S, Wright HR, Norville ZC, Tong X, Lin D, Bentzley BS, Eshel N,
                                        McLaughlin RJ, Golden SA. 2020b. Simba. v1.3. Github. https://github.com/sgoldenlab/simba
                                      Oh KS, Jung K. 2004. Gpu implementation of neural networks. Pattern Recognition 37:1311–1314. DOI: https://​
                                        doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2004.01.013
                                      Ohayon S, Avni O, Taylor AL, Perona P, Roian Egnor SE. 2013. Automated multi-­day tracking of marked mice for
                                        the analysis of social behaviour. Journal of Neuroscience Methods 219:10–19. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.​
                                        jneumeth.2013.05.013, PMID: 23810825
                                      Okubo TS, Patella P, D’Alessandro I, Wilson RI. 2020. A neural network for wind-­guided COMPASS navigation.
                                        Neuron 107:924–940.. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.06.022, PMID: 32681825
                                      Ottenheimer DJ, Bari BA, Sutlief E, Fraser KM, Kim TH, Richard JM, Cohen JY, Janak PH. 2020. A quantitative
                                        reward prediction error signal in the ventral pallidum. Nature Neuroscience 23:1267–1276. DOI: https://doi.​
                                        org/10.1038/s41593-020-0688-5, PMID: 32778791
                                      Panadeiro V, Rodriguez A, Henry J, Wlodkowic D, Andersson M. 2021. A review of 28 free animal-­tracking
                                        software applications: Current features and limitations. Lab Animal 50:246–254. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/​
                                        s41684-021-00811-1, PMID: 34326537
                                      Pennington ZT, Dong Z, Feng Y, Vetere LM, Page-­Harley L, Shuman T, Cai DJ. 2019. EzTrack: An open-­source
                                        video analysis pipeline for the investigation of animal behavior. Scientific Reports 9:19979. DOI: https://doi.​
                                        org/10.1038/s41598-019-56408-9, PMID: 31882950
                                      Pereira T.D, Aldarondo DE, Willmore L, Kislin M, Wang SSH, Murthy M, Shaevitz JW. 2019. Fast animal pose
                                        estimation using deep neural networks. Nature Methods 16:117–125. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-​
                                        018-0234-5, PMID: 30573820
                                      Pereira T.D, Shaevitz JW, Murthy M. 2020. Quantifying behavior to understand the brain. Nature Neuroscience
                                        23:1537–1549. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00734-z, PMID: 33169033
                                      Pereira TD, Tabris N, Matsliah A, Turner DM, Li J, Ravindranath S, Papadoyannis ES, Normand E, Deutsch DS,
                                        Wang ZY, McKenzie-­Smith GC, Mitelut CC, Castro MD, D’Uva J, Kislin M, Sanes DH, Kocher SD, Wang SSH,
                                        Falkner AL, Shaevitz JW, et al. 2022. SLEAP: A deep learning system for multi-­animal pose tracking. Nature
                                        Methods 19:486–495. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01426-1, PMID: 35379947
                                      Rameau F, Park J, Bailo O, Kweon IS. 2022. MC-­calib: A generic and robust calibration toolbox for multi-­camera
                                        systems. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 217:103353. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cviu.2021.​
                                        103353
                                      Redish AD. 2016. Vicarious trial and error. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 17:147–159. DOI: https://doi.org/10.​
                                        1038/nrn.2015.30, PMID: 26891625
                                      Rudin C. 2019. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use
                                        interpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence 1:206–215. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-​
                                        019-0048-x, PMID: 35603010
                                      Russakovsky O, Deng J, Su H, Krause J, Satheesh S, Ma S, Huang Z, Karpathy A, Khosla A, Bernstein M,
                                        Berg AC, Fei-­Fei L. 2015. Image net large scale visual recognition challenge. International Journal of Computer
                                        Vision 115:211–252. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y
                                      Salem GH, Dennis JU, Krynitsky J, Garmendia-­Cedillos M, Swaroop K, Malley JD, Pajevic S, Abuhatzira L,
                                        Bustin M, Gillet JP, Gottesman MM, Mitchell JB, Pohida TJ. 2015. SCORHE: A novel and practical approach to
                                        video monitoring of laboratory mice housed in vivarium cage racks. Behavior Research Methods 47:235–250.
                                        DOI: https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-014-0451-5, PMID: 24706080
                                      Schonberger JL, Frahm JM. 2016. Structure-­from-­motion revisited. 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
                                        and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). Las Vegas, NV, USA, 4104–4113. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.445
                                      Schönberger JL, Zheng E, Frahm JM, Pollefeys M. 2016. Pixelwise view selection for unstructured multi-­view
                                        stereo in. Leibe B, Matas J, Sebe N, Welling M (Eds). Computer vision – ECCV 2016, Lecture notes in computer
                                        science. Cham: Springer International Publishing. p. 501–518. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46487-​
                                        9_31
                                      Schorscher-­Petcu A, Takács F, Browne LE. 2021. Scanned optogenetic control of mammalian somatosensory
                                        input to map input-­specific behavioral outputs. eLife 10:e62026. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62026,
                                        PMID: 34323214
                                      Schweihoff JF, Loshakov M, Pavlova I, Kück L, Ewell LA, Schwarz MK. 2021. Deep lab stream enables closed-­
                                        loop behavioral experiments using deep learning-­based markerless, real-­time posture detection.
                                        Communications Biology 4:130. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-01654-9, PMID: 33514883
                                      Schweihoff JF, Hsu AI, Schwarz MK, Yttri EA. 2022. A-­SOiD, an Active Learning Platform for Expert-­Guided,
                                        Data Efficient Discovery of Behavior. [bioRxiv]. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.11.04.515138
                                      Sculley D, Holt G, Golovin D, Davydov E, Phillips T, Ebner D, Chaudhary V, Young M, Crespo JF, Dennison D.
                                        2015. Hidden Technical Debt in Machine Learning Systems Advances in Neural Information Processing
                                        Systems. Curran Associates, Inc.
                                      Segalin C, Williams J, Karigo T, Hui M, Zelikowsky M, Sun JJ, Perona P, Anderson DJ, Kennedy A. 2021a. The
                                        mouse action recognition system (mars) software pipeline for automated analysis of social behaviors in mice.
                                        eLife 10:e63720. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.63720, PMID: 34846301
                                      Segalin C, Williams J, Karigo T, Hui M, Zelikowsky M, Sun JJ, Perona P, Anderson DJ, Kennedy A. 2021b. MARS.
                                        1.8. Github. https://github.com/neuroethology/MARS



Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                        19 of 20
           Review article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿                                                                                                           Neuroscience

                                      Shi C, Schwartz S, Levy S, Achvat S, Abboud M, Ghanayim A, Schiller J, Mishne G. 2021. Learning disentangled
                                        behavior embeddings. Advances in neural information processing systems. 22562–22573.
                                      Stoyanovich J, Howe B. 2019. Nutritional labels for data and models. A Quarterly Bulletin of the Computer
                                        Society of the IEEE Technical Committee on Data Engineering.
                                      Stringer C, Pachitariu M, Steinmetz N, Reddy CB, Carandini M, Harris KD. 2019. Spontaneous behaviors drive
                                        multidimensional, brainwide activity. Science 364:255. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aav7893, PMID:
                                        31000656
                                      Sturman O, von Ziegler L, Schläppi C, Akyol F, Privitera M, Slominski D, Grimm C, Thieren L, Zerbi V, Grewe B,
                                        Bohacek J. 2020. Deep learning-­based behavioral analysis reaches human accuracy and is capable of
                                        outperforming commercial solutions. Neuropsychopharmacology 45:1942–1952. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/​
                                        s41386-020-0776-y, PMID: 32711402
                                      Sun JJ, Ryou S, Goldshmid RH, Weissbourd B, Dabiri JO, Anderson DJ, Kennedy A, Yue Y, Perona P. 2021a.
                                        Self-­Supervised Keypoint Discovery in Behavioral Videos. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2112.​05121,
                                      Sun JJ, Ryou S, Goldshmid RH, Weissbourd B, Dabiri JO, Anderson DJ, Kennedy A, Yue Y, Perona P. 2021b.
                                        BKinD. 2.0. Github. https://github.com/neuroethology/BKinD
                                      Sun JJ, Kennedy A, Zhan E, Anderson DJ, Yue Y, Perona P. 2021c. Task programming: Learning data efficient
                                        behavior representations. IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
                                        2875–2884. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/cvpr46437.2021.00290
                                      Sun JJ, Kennedy A, Zhan E, Anderson DJ, Yue Y, Perona P. 2021d. TREBA. ceacb66. Github. https://github.com/​
                                        neuroethology/TREBA
                                      Sun JJ, Tjandrasuwita M, Sehgal A, Solar-­Lezama A, Chaudhuri S, Yue Y, Costilla-­Reyes O. 2022. Neurosymbolic
                                        programming for science. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2210.​05050
                                      Szegedy C, Toshev A, Erhan D. 2013. Deep neural networks for object detection. Advances in neural information
                                        processing systems. .
                                      van Duuren E, van der Plasse G, Lankelma J, Feenstra MGP, Pennartz CMA. 2009. Single-­cell and population
                                        coding of expected reward probability in the orbitofrontal cortex of the rat. The Journal of Neuroscience
                                        29:8965–8976. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0005-09.2009, PMID: 19605634
                                      Walter T, Couzin ID. 2021. Trex, a fast multi-­animal tracking system with markerless identification, and 2D
                                        estimation of posture and visual fields. eLife 10:e64000. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.64000, PMID:
                                        33634789
                                      Warren RA, Zhang Q, Hoffman JR, Li EY, Hong YK, Bruno RM, Sawtell NB. 2021. A rapid whisker-­based decision
                                        underlying skilled locomotion in mice. eLife 10:e63596. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.63596, PMID:
                                        33428566
                                      White SR, Amarante LM, Kravitz AV, Laubach M. 2019. The future is open: Open-­source tools for behavioral
                                        neuroscience research. ENeuro 6:ENEURO.0223-­19.2019. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0223-19.​
                                        2019, PMID: 31358510
                                      Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M, Aalbersberg IJJ, Appleton G, Axton M, Baak A, Blomberg N, Boiten JW,
                                        da Silva Santos LB, Bourne PE, Bouwman J, Brookes AJ, Clark T, Crosas M, Dillo I, Dumon O, Edmunds S,
                                        Evelo CT, Finkers R, Gonzalez-­Beltran A, et al. 2016. The fair guiding principles for scientific data management
                                        and stewardship. Scientific Data 3:160018. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18, PMID: 26978244
                                      Wiltschko AB, Tsukahara T, Zeine A, Anyoha R, Gillis WF, Markowitz JE, Peterson RE, Katon J, Johnson MJ,
                                        Datta SR. 2020. Revealing the structure of pharmacobehavioral space through motion sequencing. Nature
                                        Neuroscience 23:1433–1443. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00706-3, PMID: 32958923
                                      Wu A, Buchanan EK, Whiteway MR, Schartner M, Meijer G, Noel JP, Rodriguez E, Everett C, Norovich A,
                                        Schaffer E, Mishra N, Salzman CD, Angelaki D, Bendesky A, Laboratory TIB, Cunningham J, Paninski L. 2020.
                                        Deep Graph Pose: A Semi-­Supervised Deep Graphical Model for Improved Animal Pose Tracking. [bioRxiv].
                                        DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.20.259705
                                      Zhan E, Sun JJ, Kennedy A, Yue Y, Chaudhuri S. 2021. Unsupervised Learning of Neurosymbolic Encoders.
                                        [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2107.​13132




Luxem, Sun et al. eLife 2023;12:e79305. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​79305                                                         20 of 20
